Update Intro to Airflow Guide (#3499)
astronomer/docs: learn/intro-to-airflow.md

- Basic Python. See the [Python Documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/index.html).

## Airflow history

> - 2015: Airflow started as an open source project at Airbnb. In 2015, Airbnb was growing rapidly and struggling to manage the vast quantities of internal data it generated every day. To satisfy the need for a robust scheduling tool, [Maxime Beauchemin](https://maximebeauchemin.medium.com/) created Airflow to allow Airbnb to quickly author, iterate, and monitor batch data pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the past ten years, Airflow has grown to be the open source standard for data orchestration:

- 2015: Airflow started as an open source project at Airbnb. In 2015, Airbnb was growing rapidly and struggling to manage the vast quantities of internal data it generated every day. To satisfy the need for a robust scheduling tool, [Maxime Beauchemin](https://maximebeauchemin.medium.com/) created Airflow to allow Airbnb to quickly author, iterate, and monitor batch data pipelines.
```
I always learned you weren't supposed to start paragraphs/sections with a bullet, so adding a brief lead-in sentence.

- Basic Python. See the [Python Documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/index.html).

> ## Quickstart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Get started
```
I don't love using "Quickstart" since we also have the Quickstart in the same sidebar category, which is something different. Also, do you think we should link to the tutorials here if we're recommending that path for more hands-on learning?

Reviewer: Also - I wonder if we actually just put this in the intro, instead of in its own section? Since we're not really providing a lot of guidance, maybe having it stand out as the first section doesn't make sense.

Author: I think that makes sense, I did not think of the doubling with the side bar somehow 🤦 

The getting started tutorials are already mentioned in the "Other ways to Learn" Sections, so I think this section can go entirely. :)

If you already have some Airflow experience or prefer to learn by doing, install the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started) and run the following command to create and start a new Airflow project with an example workflow:

```bash
astro dev init
astro dev start
```

> ## Milestones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Airflow history
```
I think "milestones" could possibly be misunderstood as learning milestones or something else. I think we can keep it as "history", even with a bulleted list like this.

- **MLOps**: 28% of Airflow users are already orchestrating Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) with Apache Airflow. An overview of best practices when using Airflow for MLOps can be found in [Best practices for orchestrating MLOps pipelines with Airflow](airflow-mlops.md). For an example use case, see [Use Cohere and OpenSearch to analyze customer feedback in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-llm-customer-feedback.md).
- **Managing infrastructure**: Airflow can be used to spin up and down infrastructure, for example, to run create and delete temporary tables in a database or spin up and down a Spark cluster. For an example use case, see [Use Airflow setup/ teardown to run data quality checks in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality.md).

Of course, these are just a few examples, you can orchestrate almost any kind of batch workflows with Airflow.

## Airflow concepts

To navigate Airflow resources, it is helpful to have a general understanding of the following Airflow concepts.

> ### Running pipelines

Reviewer: I know it was my suggestion, but now I'm not actually sure I like "running" here, because maybe that points too much to something like schedules, or running Airflow. What about "Pipeline basics"?

Author: I think Pipeline basics would work. `Pipeline terminology` might be more accurate but sounds a little boring 😅 I'll change it to pipeline basics and will make a note for Jake that we are very open to other section titles :)

### Additional concepts

Of course there is much more to Airflow than just DAGs and tasks. Here are a few additional concepts and features that you are likely to encounter:

- **Airflow scheduling**: Airflow offers a variety of ways to schedule your DAGs. For more information, see [DAG scheduling and timetables in Airflow](scheduling-in-airflow.md).
- **Airflow connections**: Airflow connections offer a way to store credentials and other connection information for external systems and reference them in your DAGs. For more information, see [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).
- **Airflow variables**: Airflow variables are key-value pairs that can be used to store information in your Airflow environment. For more information, see [Use Airflow variables](airflow-variables.md).
- **XComs**: XCom is short for "cross-communication", you can use XCom to pass information between your Airflow tasks. For more information, see [Passing data between tasks](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md).
- **Airflow REST API**: The [Airflow REST API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) allows Airflow to interact with RESTful web services.

> ## Running Airflow

Reviewer: I think running Airflow should go before Airflow concepts

> There are many ways to run Airflow, Astronomer recommends: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to run Airflow, some of which are easier than others. Astronomer recommends: 
```

> - To use the open-source [**Astro CLI**](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started-cli) to run Airflow locally. The Astro CLI is the easiest way to create a local Airflow instance running in [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) and free to use for everyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using the open-source [**Astro CLI**](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started-cli) to run Airflow locally. The Astro CLI is the easiest way to create a local Airflow instance running in [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) and is free to use for everyone.
```

> - To use [**Astro**](https://astronomer.io/try-astro) to run Airflow in production. A free trial is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using [**Astro**](https://astronomer.io/try-astro) to run Airflow in production. Astro is a fully-managed SaaS application for data orchestration that helps teams write and run data pipelines with Apache Airflow at any level of scale. A free trial is available.
```

> To learn more about other options for running Airflow, see [the Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/installation/index.html). All Airflow installations include the mandatory Airflow components as part of their infrastructure: the webserver, the scheduler, the database, and the executor. See [Airflow components](airflow-components.md) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Airflow installations include the mandatory Airflow components as part of their infrastructure: the webserver, the scheduler, the database, and the executor. See [Airflow components](airflow-components.md) for more information.
```
I'm making this even more opinionated :) We link to the official Airflow docs in the resources section, but otherwise I don't think we need to mention other ways of running Airflow in a doc of ours. If people want that, they can go find it themselves.

Airflow provides many benefits, including:

> - **Tool agnosticism**: Airflow can connect to any application in your data ecosystem that allows connections through an API and prebuilt modules exist for many common data tools.

Author: yeah, I tried to phrase it without using the term `operator` since we don't assume any Airflow knowledge for this guide. Also `modules` is the term that encompasses sensors, operators, triggers and decorators, but yeah I agree it is not widely used. 

How about splitting it into 2 sentences and using `operator` and linking to the operators 101 guide on it?

Some common use cases of Airflow include:

- **ETL/ELT**: [90% of Airflow users](https://airflow.apache.org/survey/) use it for Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) and Extract-Load-Transfrom (ELT) patterns. Often, these pipelines support critical operational processes. For an example use case, see [ELT with Airflow and dbt Core](use-case-airflow-dbt.md).
- **Business operations**: 68% of Airflow users have used Airflow to orchestrate data supporting their business directly, creating data-powered applications and products, often in combination with MLOps pipelines. For an example use case, see [The Laurel Algorithm: MLOps, AI, and Airflow for Perfect Timekeeping](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/the-laurel-algorithm-mlops-ai-and-airflow-for-perfect-timekeeping-video/).
- **MLOps**: 28% of Airflow users are already orchestrating Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) with Apache Airflow. An overview of best practices when using Airflow for MLOps can be found in [Best practices for orchestrating MLOps pipelines with Airflow](airflow-mlops.md). For an example use case, see [Use Cohere and OpenSearch to analyze customer feedback in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-llm-customer-feedback.md).

> - **Managing infrastructure**: Airflow can be used to spin up and down infrastructure, for example, to run create and delete temporary tables in a database or spin up and down a Spark cluster. For an example use case, see [Use Airflow setup/ teardown to run data quality checks in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality.md).

Author: I think both exist, but I agree we use tear down in the setup/teardown feature so good to standardize on that :)

- **Operators (`XYZOperator`)**: [Operators](what-is-an-operator.md) are classes abstracting over Python code designed to perform a specific action. You can instantiate an operator by providing the necessary parameters to the class. Each instantiated operator becomes one task in your DAG.

There are a couple of special types of operators that are worth mentioning:

- **Sensors**: [Sensors](what-is-a-sensor.md) are Operators that keep running until a certain condition is fulfilled. For example, the [HttpSensor](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-http/versions/latest/modules/HttpSensor) waits for an Http request object to fulfill a user defined set of criteria.
- **Deferrable Operators**: [Deferrable Operators](deferrable-operators.md) use the Python [asyncio](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html) library to run tasks asynchronously. For example, the [DateTimeSensorAsync](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/astronomer-providers/modules/HttpOperatorAsync) waits asynchronously for a specific date and time to occur. Note that your Airflow environment needs to run a triggerer component to use deferrable operators.

> Some commonly used building blocks like the BashOperator, the `@task` decorator or the PythonOperator are part of core Airflow and automatically installed in all Airflow instances. Additionally, many operators are maintained separately to Airflow in **Airflow provider packages**, which group modules interacting with a specific service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some commonly used building blocks, like the BashOperator, the `@task` decorator, or the PythonOperator, are part of core Airflow and automatically installed in all Airflow instances. Additionally, many operators are maintained separately to Airflow in **Airflow provider packages**, which group modules interacting with a specific service into a package.
```

You can browse all available operators and find detailed information about their parameters in the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/). For many common data tools, there are [integration tutorials](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/category/integrations) available, showing a simple implementation of the provider package.

### Additional concepts

> Of course there is much more to Airflow than just DAGs and tasks. Here are a few additional concepts and features that you are likely to encounter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While there are much more to Airflow than just DAGs and tasks, here are a few additional concepts and features that you are likely to encounter:
```

- **Airflow scheduling**: Airflow offers a variety of ways to schedule your DAGs. For more information, see [DAG scheduling and timetables in Airflow](scheduling-in-airflow.md).
- **Airflow connections**: Airflow connections offer a way to store credentials and other connection information for external systems and reference them in your DAGs. For more information, see [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).
- **Airflow variables**: Airflow variables are key-value pairs that can be used to store information in your Airflow environment. For more information, see [Use Airflow variables](airflow-variables.md).

> - **XComs**: XCom is short for "cross-communication", you can use XCom to pass information between your Airflow tasks. For more information, see [Passing data between tasks](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **XComs**: XCom is short for *cross-communication*, you can use XCom to pass information between your Airflow tasks. For more information, see [Passing data between tasks](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md).
```

- **Airflow REST API**: The [Airflow REST API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) allows Airflow to interact with RESTful web services.

## Resources

- [Astronomer Webinars](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/): Live deep dives into Airflow and Astronomer topics, all previous webinars are available to watch on-demand.
- [Astronomer Academy](https://academy.astronomer.io/): In depth video courses on Airflow and Astronomer topics.
- [Official Airflow Documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/): The official documentation for Apache Airflow.
- [Airflow GitHub](https://github.com/apache/airflow): The official GitHub repository for Apache Airflow.
- [Airflow Slack](https://apache-airflow-slack.herokuapp.com/): The official Airflow Slack workspace, the best place to ask your Airflow questions!

## Next steps

> Now that you have a basic understanding of Apache Airflow, you are ready to write your first DAG by following the the [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md) tutorial.

Author: ```suggestion
Now that you have a basic understanding of Apache Airflow, you are ready to write your first DAG by following the [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md) tutorial.
```

Airflow provides many benefits, including:

- **Tool agnosticism**: Airflow can connect to any application in your data ecosystem that allows connections through an API and prebuilt modules exist for many common data tools.
- **High extensibility**: Since Airflow pipelines are written in Python, you can build on top of the existing codebase and extend the functionality of Airflow to meet your needs. Anything you can do in Python, you can do in Airflow.

> - **CI/CD for data pipelines**: With all the logic of your workflows defined in Python, it is possible to implement best practice CI/CD processes for your data pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Since this is a pretty long list, I'd suggest taking CICD out. It's pretty specific, and not a built-in function of Airflow.

- **Infinite scalability**: Given enough computing power, you can orchestrate as many processes as you need, no matter the complexity of your pipelines.
- **Dynamic data pipelines**: Airflow offers the ability to create [dynamic tasks](dynamic-tasks.md) to adjust your workflows based on the data you are processing at runtime.
- **Active OSS community**: With millions of users and thousands of contributors, Airflow is here to stay and grow. Join the [Airflow Slack](https://apache-airflow-slack.herokuapp.com/) to become part of the community.
- **Observability**: The Airflow UI provides an immediate overview of all your data pipelines and can provide the source of truth for workflows in your whole data ecosystem.

![Screenshot of the main view of the Airflow UI with seven enabled workflows.](/img/guides/intro-to-airflow_data_engineering_prod_overview.png)

## Airflow use cases

> Airflow is used by many data professionals with a wide range of backgrounds and use cases in [companies of all sizes and types](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/INTHEWILD.md). Data engineers, data scientists, ML engineers, and data analysts all need to perform actions on data in a complex web of dependencies. With Airflow you can orchestrate these actions and dependencies in a single platform, no matter which tools you are using and how complex your pipelines are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow is used by many data professionals at [companies of all sizes and types](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/INTHEWILD.md). Data engineers, data scientists, ML engineers, and data analysts all need to perform actions on data in a complex web of dependencies. With Airflow, you can orchestrate these actions and dependencies in a single platform, no matter which tools you are using and how complex your pipelines are.
```

![Symbolic graph with Airflow shown as the center of the data ecosystem, with arrows pointing out from Airflow to logos of a variety of common data tools.](/img/guides/intro-to-airflow_airflow_in_ecosystem.png)

Some common use cases of Airflow include:

> - **ETL/ELT for analytics**: [90% of Airflow users](https://airflow.apache.org/survey/), use it for Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) and Extract-Load-Transfrom (ELT) patterns related to data analytics, which makes it the most common use case. Often, these pipelines support critical operational processes like regulatory reports. For an example use case, see [ELT with Airflow and dbt Core](use-case-airflow-dbt.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **ETL/ELT for analytics**: [90% of Airflow users](https://airflow.apache.org/survey/) use it for Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) and Extract-Load-Transfrom (ELT) patterns. Often, these pipelines support critical operational processes. For an example use case, see [ELT with Airflow and dbt Core](use-case-airflow-dbt.md).
```

Reviewer: Similar to the use cases page update, I would keep this to ETL/ELT, and update the next one to just "business operations".

- **ETL/ELT for business operations**: 68% of Airflow users have used Airflow to orchestrate data supporting their business directly, creating data-powered applications and products, often in combination with MLOps pipelines. For an example use case, see [The Laurel Algorithm: MLOps, AI, and Airflow for Perfect Timekeeping](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/the-laurel-algorithm-mlops-ai-and-airflow-for-perfect-timekeeping-video/).
- **MLOps**: 28% of Airflow users are already orchestrating Machine Learning Operations (MLOps) with Apache Airflow. An overview of best practices when using Airflow for MLOps can be found in [Best practices for orchestrating MLOps pipelines with Airflow](airflow-mlops.md). For an example use case, see [Use Cohere and OpenSearch to analyze customer feedback in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-llm-customer-feedback.md).

> - **Spinning up and down infrastructure**: Airflow can be used to spin up and down infrastructure, for example, to run create and delete temporary tables in a database or spin up and down a Spark cluster. For an example use case, see [Use Airflow setup/ teardown to run data quality checks in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Managing infrastructure**: Airflow can be used to spin up and down infrastructure, for example, to run create and delete temporary tables in a database or spin up and down a Spark cluster. For an example use case, see [Use Airflow setup/ teardown to run data quality checks in an MLOps pipeline](use-case-setup-teardown-data-quality.md).
```

Of course, these are just a few examples, you can orchestrate almost any kind of batch workflows with Airflow.

## Airflow concepts

To navigate Airflow resources, it is helpful to have a general understanding of the following Airflow concepts.

> ### Core concepts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running pipelines
```
Let me know what you think of these suggestions - I don't love "core concepts" and "building blocks", because it doesn't really tell me what the concepts are about, and I would say operators/decorators/providers are "core" concepts in Airflow. At the same time, I'm not sure something like "DAG runs"/"Writing DAGs" is right, because maybe people don't know what a DAG is. So I'm trying to make them more specific, but still general enough that they're easily understandable.

Author: Yeah, I struggled naming those subsections 😅 
I like the running vs writing pipelines distinction!

- **Task**: A step in a DAG describing a single unit of work.
- **Task instance**: The execution of a task at a specific point in time.
- **Dynamic task**: An Airflow tasks that serves as a blueprint for a variable number of dynamically mapped tasks created at runtime. For more information, see [Dynamic tasks](dynamic-tasks.md).

The Screenshot below shows one simple DAG called `example_astronauts` with two tasks, `get_astronauts` and `print_astronaut_craft`. The `get_astronauts` task is a regular task, while the `print_astronaut_craft` task is a dynamic task. The grid view of the Airflow UI shows individual DAG runs and task instances, while the graph displays the structure of the DAG. You can learn more about the Airflow UI in [An introduction to the Airflow UI](airflow-ui.md).

![Screenshot of the Airflow UI Grid view with the Graph tab selected showing a DAG graph with a regular and a dynamic task as well as a DAG run and Task instance.](/img/guides/intro-to-airflow_core_concepts_ui.png)

<details>

> <summary>Click to view the full DAG code used for the Screenshot</summary>

Reviewer: 😮 did not know we could do this!

Author: Same! @jwitz showed me in the Get started tutorial review. I will be using that everywhere now 😃

<div>
    <div><CodeBlock language="python">{example_astronauts}</CodeBlock></div>
</div>
</details>

It is a core best practice to keep tasks as atomic as possible, meaning that each task should perform a single action. Additionally, tasks should be idempotent, which means they produce the same output every time they are run with the same input. See [DAG writing best practices in Apache Airflow](dag-best-practices.md).

> ### Building blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Writing pipelines
```

### Additional concepts

Of course there is much more to Airflow than just DAGs and tasks. Here are a few additional concepts and features that you are likely to encounter:

- **Airflow scheduling**: Airflow offers a variety of ways to schedule your DAGs. For more information, see [DAG scheduling and timetables in Airflow](scheduling-in-airflow.md).
- **Airflow connections**: Airflow connections offer a way to store credentials and other connection information for external systems and reference them in your DAGs. For more information, see [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).
- **Airflow variables**: Airflow variables are key-value pairs that can be used to store information in your Airflow environment. For more information, see [Use Airflow variables](airflow-variables.md).
- **XComs**: XCom is short for "cross-communication", you can use XCom to pass information between your Airflow tasks. For more information, see [Passing data between tasks](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md).
- **Airflow REST API**: The [Airflow REST API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) allows Airflow to interact with RESTful web services.

> - **Airflow plugins**: Airflow plugins are a way to further extend the functionality of Airflow. For more information, see [Airflow plugins](using-airflow-plugins.md). Note that [custom hooks and operators](airflow-importing-custom-hooks-operators.md) do not need to be installed as plugins, but can be used directly imported into your DAGs as Python modules.

Reviewer: How would you feel about not including plugins here? As you'll notice from some of my other comments, overall I want to make this guide a bit more concise :) and I think plugins are not something a brand new person is likely to come in looking for specifically, nor would it hurt if they started using Airflow without knowing what they are. The rest of this list seems pretty critical (although _maybe_ we could remove the API bullet.....?)

Author: I'm ok with kicking out the plugins for simplicity, I mean I didn't know what they did for the first few months I was writing DAGs, so definitely not a crucial intro topic. 😅 The main reason I added them here was for the note about not putting custom operators in there anymore but I think new users wont be writing custom modules anyways and this is explained in detail in the custom operator guide. 

Hmmm... the API bullet. I am on the fence about that one because it feels like one of the concepts that can unlock so many use cases but can be hard to discover? It is probably not relevant for the "classical" new DAG author but relevant for anyone wanting to use Airflow in some larger framework. But I might be biased because I look for API information and docs a lot in other tool's documentation 😅

> ## Airflow components

Reviewer: I think we should actually remove the Airflow components section, and instead have a section for "Running Airflow", that would say there are many ways to run Airflow, but the easiest is run locally with the CLI, run in production on Astro, for more info about the components of Airflow see the components guide.

Author: I like that idea :)

To learn more about the Airflow infrastructure, see [Airflow Components](airflow-components.md).

## Resources

> - [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started): The easiest way to run a local Airflow environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Removing since we will link above in my new suggested section. And then we can keep this to more high level resource "centers"

- [Astronomer Webinars](https://www.astronomer.io/events/webinars/): Live deep dives into Airflow and Astronomer topics, all previous webinars are available to watch on-demand.

> - [Astronomer Learn](https:/docs.astronomer.io/learn/): (you are here!) A collection of guides and tutorials on Airflow. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- [Astronomer Academy](https://academy.astronomer.io/): In depth video courses on Airflow and Astronomer topics.

> - [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/): A collection of Airflow providers, with detailed information about each provider and its operators, as well as example DAGs showing how to use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Removing a few of these since the list is pretty long.
